when we allow ourselves to be aggressive
to ourselves then we allow almost in
kind other people to be that aggressive
with us we expect it and it's okay of
course we're living with it every day
why would we think it's not okay as we
learn to love ourselves as we say no
that kind of selft talk that kind of
internal relationship is not okay I'm
not living with that then we're not
going to accept it from the outside
world so we do we do a lot of work with
anger and one thing that I've seen you
say a lot of times in courses or even in
a coaching session is like let's make
the passive aggression active let's like
really bring it forward and so we've
we've done a lot of talking about about
anger and how to move that aggression
and I want to now take this episode and
go into the passive aggression and and
just really work with that and see what
it is how does it show up in people's
lives how how can they find it one of
the things with passive aggression is
it's kind of hidden it's kind of under
the surface so at least at least that's
the idea I want to really go into the
kind of the nitty-gritty into the
subtlety how's that sound sounds great I
would love that awesome let's do it so
just to start with I want to really just
Define our term what is how do you
define passive
aggression the form of aggression that
triggered me for the longest period of
time in my life I think uh yeah wow um
passive aggression is just it's simply
you could I mean you can almost call it
covert
aggression um but it's it's basically
aggression that's not being owned as
aggression not sometimes not by the
person who's doing it sometimes not by
the person who it's being done to but
it's basically I'm upset but I'm not
allowed to be angry and therefore I'm
going to be passively angry so I'm going
to figure out a way to attack you that
isn't fully admitting to myself or to
somebody else uh
that it's an
attack and and that that's what it is
and it's and it's typically based in
fear and the fact that it's passive is
typically based in the fear of being
outwardly aggressive about something got
it so the the difference between passive
and active aggression is in some sense
the owning of it
the yeah it's it's the recognition some
people can own passive aggression but
they're still going to hide it um it's
it's how good you with your own anger
your own aggression your to some degree
your own ambition um like the more that
you're able to be in love with those
aspects of yourself the less likely it's
going to be that you're going to be
passive in your aggression so what what
would be the difference then if the
definition there is of like is around
the awareness around the owning of it
what's the difference between passive
aggression and somebody who's like just
like straight up screaming and they're
not even aware that they're mad like I'm
not mad you're mad
what's the distinction there from
passive aggression too that that form
yeah that's great yeah so the passive
aggression is going to find ways that
are not direct at the aggression so I'm
not mad you're mad blah blah blah that's
very that's very direct it's like boom
here you are Bam Bam Bam you're you're
the problem I'm not the problem that
kind of a thing passive aggression is
like guilt guilt's a perfect example of
passive aggression yeah I am going
to try to manipulate you needle you
which is an aggressive act I'm going to
try to get you to do something but I'm
going to do it in a way that I look like
I'm the victim and often times not all
but oftentimes in passive aggression the
person who's doing it is uh is in the
role of the victim like I'm stuck woe is
me I can't can't be me doing it like you
know I'm I'm the one that's being hurt
here and and if you really want to see
someone go from passive aggression to
aggression like take away their victim
role like and I we can talk about that
later but that's the thing is that it's
very much uh not direct and so guilt is
a great example of passive aggression
because you're trying you're being
aggressive in the fact that you're
trying to change somebody that you're
trying to be tell them how to be or make
them be a particular
way but you're not doing it with any
kind of ownership at all you're not
saying hey I I want you to be this way
or God damn it I'm going to yell at you
if you're not this way
it's like you know it's like that yeah
so kind of what I'm hearing there is
that if like the act of aggression is I
want to change you and I'm aware of it
and that's like what I'm clear as
happening and the passive aggression is
I'm trying to change you or get you to
do something and pretend that I'm not
like I don't want you to see that I'm
trying to do this to to change you yeah
yeah and maybe they don't even see it
themselves and sometimes they do like
sometimes you know mothers will sit
around and talk about how good of guilt
Trippers they are and some people will
guilt trip you and they won't even know
that they're um that they're doing it or
they'll be you know be hidden from them
that they're doing it right or they'll
think that yeah I'm doing it but it's my
only choice you know there'll be like
those kinds of thought processes that
happen yeah what's interesting to me
about it is that typically if a child
was raised with passive aggression it's
incredibly hard for them to see that
it's happening to them mhm so like if so
if if Mom's guilt tripping them they're
going to feel like they've done
something wrong and Mom has is like wo
is me poor victim like has something bad
has happened to her that they're selfish
and that it's very hard for them to see
like oh actually my mom's being
aggressive yeah you know just in a
passive form my mom's manipulating me in
a passive form my mom is attacking me in
a passive form yeah and so of course
that can continue on into adulthood as
well so now my next question is like
what are what are some examples of
passive aggressive behavior that we
might encounter in our everyday life
including some examples people might not
expect they've been swimming in it uh
guilt talking about somebody behind
their back certain in a in a way that
has some mou like there's ways of
talking about somebody and being like
I'm processing this so that I can fall
in love with them more but if
you're if you're or I can learn to like
them or resolve my own issue but if
you're talking about them as a way to
like turn somebody's opinion on them or
to make yourself above them or just
prove that you're better than or
whatever then that's like an incredible
form of passive aggression being late uh
can be a form of passive aggression um
particularly Perpetual lateness
particularly Perpetual lateness for a
particular kind of person right like
that I know people that are always on
time but always late for their mother as
an example MH um saying you're going to
do something and not doing it uh is
another one um confusion can be one
where like you never give the answer you
always get confused and so the person
playing down it's like needling is
another one just like little small
sarcasms little undermining things is
another great example of ways to be
passive aggress aggressive in fact I
have a story about this this is like a
lovely story so my mom and dad
they had a relationship where my dad
yelled and my mom was like apparently
the victim and and she would feel like
why did I put up with this or why am I
putting up with this but she would just
like kind of constantly stay
and and then my dad died and my mom came
up to the house and my girls after like
two days looked at me and they're like
why do I want to yell at your mom like
they're like like it's so strange that
like I we don't want to yell at anybody
but we want to yell at your mom like
what's going on there and I'm like yeah
my mom's needling you my mom's like
giving you these little itty bitty Jabs
that you can hardly tell they're
happening like dick dick dick dick dick
and then pretty soon you get like really
frustrated and and so she's inviting
your aggression with her passive
aggression and that's that was the thing
that was happening in almost all
relationship where there's somebody
who's really aggressive there's a
passive aggressive relationship that's
going on and so that's a like perfect
example of it and it's so subtle that my
kids couldn't even see that they were
being
needled right and it was just like
needling and it was comparing oh you do
this but you do that it was like these
little comparisons that were happening
and yeah it's a it's an example I think
that can especially happen in a
relationship with somebody that you love
or that you want to love you want there
to be you want to feel love from them
and so you kind
of just kind of plow under those little
needles and just like oh they didn't
mean that or that's not with them like
seeing seeing the good in them but not
really seeing necessarily the the
aggression or not not feeling the hurt
right and and also yeah there's so many
things so if somebody's in that place
where they're passive aggressive and
they're not really and you want you're
going to have to admit that to yourself
for you to see that this is what's going
on one is you're like you have to
question their their love for you
there's that questioning that goes on
two is if you question it there's a good
chance they're going to get really
aggressive and so to some degree it's
like right so I can either have my mom
needle me or yell at me like there's
some version of that that also happens
like oh what's going to happen if I like
throw away the veil like when we look at
the Oz behind the curtain what's what's
really going to go down um and then the
other the other thing that you really
have to do when you when you recognize
that somebody is is being passive
aggressive with you is
to to draw a boundary that is that's
going to be uncomfortable typically and
it's going to be it's uncomfortable
there's some boundaries that are
uncomfortable because you're scared that
if I draw them I'll get attacked and
this uncomfortable boundary is typically
I'm going to draw it and they're going
to deny it which is like very gasy
gaslighting another form of passive
aggression by the way or sometimes it's
directly aggressive but
yeah so I'm going to get gaset so that's
another thing yeah yeah so you talked
about the veil and that makes me just
wonder like what is what is the ad
aptive like purpose or uh function of
passive aggression how does it how does
it develop how do we develop passive
aggression passive aggressive tendencies
what's what makes that serve Us in any
way yeah so I don't know about serve
that's a good question what I know is
how they how they come to pass so
typically what happens is somebody isn't
allowed to be aggressive in a home right
so if I'm aggressive if I get angry
they're they're going to get even
angrier and you know or it doesn't work
like with my daughter and her sister my
other daughter one day I was like you
you're crying but you look like you're
angry I'm sure I've told this story
before and she's I'm like how often are
you actually you know angry when you
look sad she 50% of the time I was like
huh why she like because if I get angry
at my sister she just hits me but if I
get sad at my sister she does what I
want her to do which is by the way
another form of passive aggression
getting sad at people is a great getting
scared at people those are great forms
of passive aggression where I'm
basically trying to manipulate you
through my emotional experience but at
the same time I'm the victim I'm the one
that's hurt yeah um so so it's an
Adaptive Behavior because that
aggression has to go somewhere we're
like born with a certain amount of
aggression we're born with a certain
amount of anger or life is going to
throw stuff at us that's going to make
us angry like that's just the nature of
life and the nature of Being Human and
so if you don't get to have that temper
tantrum if you don't get to have that
anger if your girls good girls don't get
angry don't yell then it's going to be
more and more passive aggression and
like watching girls of certain cultures
that's in seventh grade it's really
[__] apparent that they weren't
allowed to be aggressive and so there's
like this crazy amount of passive
aggression of talking behind each
other's back and gossiping of making
people feel small and all these subtle
ways it's all it's all very aggressive
behavior mhm you know and and it's weird
because boys they'll hit each
other it's just I'm not saying I'm not
supporting that kind of bullying but
passive aggression it's just as
destructive just as
bullying it's just we don't we don't we
as a society don't like to look at it
and go oh that's that's equally not
acceptable or equally aggressive even or
equally aggressive or equally as
damaging yeah because we really buy into
that the victim story of you know I and
including the victim the of oh I'm I'm
the one that's hurt I'm stuck yeah so
how how does passive aggression show up
in in like personal relationships and
work relationships like over time we're
we're talking about right now kind of
atomic instances moments of passive
aggression how about like how it builds
and affects a a marriage over 20 years
oh yeah or or a work culture [__]
kills it kills kills both of them I
would I think it's far easier to get a
functional work or marriage out of
aggression than it is out of passive
aggression so it's it's usually why when
we're talking to people were like oh hey
can you make that passive aggression
into aggressive that's the reason is
because once you actually see the
problem and everybody can acknowledge
the problem then it's easier to fix MH
so typically
somebody feels like they can't be
aggressive with their wants they can't
get angry and so some another person in
the relationship feels like they can't
be aggressive with their wants can the
first person gets resentful and so they
start doing all these passive aggressive
things in response
to in response to the person getting
their needs met or whatever it is and so
there's just like this undermining thing
that
happens
um great example this is that um so I
know this couple that's been married for
gosh 20 years or some some something
like that and the man and the couple the
woman is like the PowerHouse and the man
you know feels like isn't getting his
needs or wants met and so whatever the
the woman wants he just doesn't do it he
says he's going to do it but he doesn't
like hey there's that like broken down
car in the front and it's like yeah I
I'll take care of it and then two weeks
later nothing's been taken care of and
she's like starting to get angry like
why aren't you taking care of the thing
and he's like I can do it but I now I
feel really bad I feel
horrible because like I should do it and
I'm not doing it and so now I feel
really bad and like uh and then the
woman's like I can't even tell him like
that he hasn't done his thing because
now he goes into a depression and so
I've lost my husband and the connection
which is more passive aggression for you
know whatever two weeks cuz now he's in
a depression and by the way the car
still hasn't [__] moved so now I
can't even complain about it and I can't
and I can't ask for it to be moved
because otherwise I'm going to like
suffer all this [__] so she starts
getting resentful and then he's resent
and so there's just this massive
resentment that happens and then
everybody gets scared to actually ask
for what they want because there's all
this passive aggression that's occurring
and so it basically stagnates um like
the ability to express what you want and
need and therefore it stagnates the
marriage or the business yeah oh I can't
say that like we were just at that uh
company that I won't mention the name of
but everybody felt like they had to be
nice yeah and so nobody could say things
like the company's in [__] trouble
and we have to do a better job we have
to be a players if we're going to keep
our jobs because that would be seen as
no like that's not nice that's not a
nice thing to
say like crazy so that that's what it
does it just and it just like it's a
very in a
relationship if you see a very slow
decline with everybody trying to like
Smooth over and walk on eggshells you
know there's just like a [__] ton of
passive aggression going on in the
relationship yeah one one thing I heard
there in in that story or just in in
that
overall like description of how this
plays out is that there's a step in
there that often happens where there's
like a withdrawal of love like I'm just
going to withdraw
and that could be I'm going to withdraw
from the resentment or the passive
aggression but it could also be its own
form of passive aggression correct like
fine you know that kind and and so I'm
curious to to go into a little bit more
deeply what are some of the ways that
people tend to respond to passive
aggression that feed the
cycle yeah that's great I I love what
you just said about like the withdrawal
of love so just to speak about that for
a second before we get into the the
question what's amazing to me is that
like if we withdraw love it hurts us
like it's it's a it's a way in which we
are cutting off love from ourselves
right so when we are open to love if
we're loving somebody else not
caretaking but loving somebody actually
loving somebody else the love equally
comes to us and through us and to them
cutting it off you're cutting off that
love it's really quite a painful
experience experience once you really
realize what it's like to live with an
open heart to close it is just
sucks and and so we're doing one one of
the main forms of passive aggression and
it's a great like metaphor for the whole
thing is to cut off love from another
person like oh I'm going to withhold my
love from you until you do what I want
or just to punish you or just
vindictiveness but often times when it's
happening you feel it as I'm protecting
myself you don't feel it as I am trying
to hurt this other person the other
person might feel it they might and even
if they don't say it they might feel
guilty but they felt that withdrawal
they felt like they've done something
wrong and so it's just this very
interesting thing where sometimes that
passive aggression is consciously known
and sometimes it is not it is no I'm
just protecting myself MH so that's just
an interesting thing about it
um so onto your question which was can
you remind me yeah just uh I mean you
answered it pretty well there but maybe
there's more ways what are what are some
of the ways that people tend to respond
to passive aggressive behavior that tend
to spin it spiral it out of out of
proportion even more deeply yeah so
there's you know it's the same way that
people react
to uh aggressive behavior so some people
walk on eggshells oh my gosh like I
don't do that or I'll break them oh my
gosh and so they hold back their truth
as a way to not break the situation or
not break the person or not create an a
response not create the depression not
create whatever so there's like this
tentativeness and that's how some people
react to aggression like oh I got to
worry about this person getting angry
the other way is the other way people
respond to anger which is more [__]
anger right which is the relationship
that my dad had with my mom which
was but he would feel bad about it he
would be like ah [__] like I shouldn't
be yelling
and she was like yeah you shouldn't be
yelling but she was also provoking the
thing and not being able to own it which
is one of the things that's really
interesting if you look at the golden
algorithm of passive
aggression often times somebody was
learned to be passive aggression because
they couldn't be aggressive somebody was
more aggressive than them and so their
passive aggression is the thing that's
creating the emotion that they're trying
to avoid which is someone attacking them
right that feeling of oh my God I'm
scared somebody is attacking me their
passive aggression is creating it so
there's this beautiful golden algorithm
to passive aggression often to create
that aggressive experience in return
yeah and for those just listening to
this and haven't heard that episode
there's an episode on the golden
algorithm that goes really deeply into
how how the thing we're avoiding
recreates the feeling we're avoiding
exactly the way we avoid it yeah yeah so
those are the two ways that they either
walk on eggshells or they get aggressive
back and that's that makes the them
worse that that's what makes the passive
aggression get even wor it fuels the
fire yeah yeah yeah and there's there's
another one that you mentioned in there
I don't know if this is another category
of thing but you mentioned sometimes
people will go into shame and like how
can going into shame be a form of
passive aggression like okay look now
you've lost me I'm collapsing see now
you've done wrong and you've got to fix
this right so again yes so you can
like you know I was talking to a client
the other day as moms uh came over from
Europe to to help take care of their kid
and and it was like everything was I'm
being put upon and so he you know he was
very much actively trying to say hey it
really hurts when you criticize the way
we're taking care of the kid oh am I not
allowed to say my peace am I not allowed
to like share my opinion fine if you if
I'm not allowed to share my opinion I
want to share my opinion here right like
it's like that kind of like whatever
thing he asked for she wasn't aggressive
like don't tell me how to behave she was
basically making everything an
oppression right so that she could
maintain this thing and I was I said Hey
try this one out for a minute just every
time she criticizes say
ouch you know and at first it was like
Hey that that doesn't hurt no I'm sorry
so sorry and at first it was like hey
uh I didn't hurt
you and he would say yeah but it hurt so
I'm saying ouch and eventually like she
couldn't be in the position of passive
aggression anymore because every time he
said ouch so it became really clear who
who was being hurt in that moment but
she really fought for a while like no
you can't take I'm the hurt one I'm like
you can't take that from me you can't
take the hurt one from me that's me and
so that's often like the story of
passive aggression is that when the
person who's being passive aggressive
doesn't want to have the role of I'm the
hurt one taken
away or I'm the non- aggressor yeah and
then I'm also noticing how How could
somebody say ouch in a passive
aggressive way like ow you hurt me
versus like ouch upright HT yeah so the
so the difference there is like are you
empowered do you feel empowered are you
clear that you're making a choice and
that you're not stuck
H so generally it is when we've like so
if we're in the fear triangle and we
have an episode on that if you're in the
fear triangle if you're in the bully
you're not being passive aggressive but
if you're in the victim you're almost
all of your aggression is passive
aggression and so if you feel like
you're stuck you feel like you have no
choice you you're just blaming somebody
else internally blaming somebody else
for your situation I guarantee you're
being passive aggressive in some way
yeah or or if you're not you're going to
be in the next you know day like that's
that's the way it works is like if you
feel stuck and you're blaming then that
that is even the blame is a form of
passive
aggression because you're blaming
somebody for your situation that you
have full choice
in yeah so this kind of leads into the
next question which it's somewhat
natural coming it's somewhat natural now
is to ask what could somebody do
different ly than what we've just
previously described as the things that
tend to invite more passive aggression
and now I want to kind of maybe tweak
the questions maybe not what people do
differently but it's how do they be yeah
it's like how it's maybe even the
question is how do we own our own
aggression our own empowerment in such a
way that we respond to passive
aggression in a way that diffuses the
dynamic and what are some of the ways
that that might look yeah so so I think
the first the most important thing is
that you like don't meet aggression with
aggression typically occasionally you
need to but typically meeting aggression
with aggression leads to a power Dynamic
so leads to more fear triangle so so and
one the most common form of aggression
that you would have is that I want to
change you so trying to change the
person's passive aggression
is is you're like it's you're entering
the dynamic with them mhm either by I'm
going to be angry at you to change you
or I'm going to I'm going to walk on
eggshells to change you or I'm going to
try to convince you to change you like
any anything like that that's that's
really the dynamic and so you want to un
the way to undo it is to not try to
change them but you can own your own
experience so one of the ways to do that
is ouch that hurt one of the ways to do
that is to draw a boundary like oh I'm
not really interested in being guilt
tripped one of the ways to do that is
just own what's happening oh hey
that feels like you're guilt tripping me
what what would make you guilt trip me
right now be view any of those
things again it's really easy to make
any of those things passive
aggressive so the only way to do it is
to really be in touch with your own
empowerment which is I think the most
critical piece which is you are making a
choice to avoid a certain consequence
and to own that choice like you don't
get to control the consequences but you
get to control the choices that you make
and so
to really own that you're making that
choice I think is a really good first
step internal step to changing a passive
aggressive
Dynamic also boundaries are just really
really good like oh I don't want to be
criticized and the response might be
like I'm not criticizing you am I not
allowed to say what I want oh you're
welcome to say what you want and when I
feel criticized I am going
to walk away or I am going to say ouch
or I am going to tell you that I feel
criticized so that you know so you can
act accordingly whatever it is that your
reaction is going to be so I think
boundaries is a really good one just
like any form of anger at you or sadness
at you or fear I think boundaries is a
really good is a really good choice and
and just owning it and just saying what
it is out loud I think is really
important if you're in the dynamic of
receiving passive aggression if you're
in the dynamic of giving passive
aggression then there's other things
that you might want to be doing but but
receiving it it's you don't enter the
dynamic and you and you don't accept
someone being aggressive with you or
trying to change you by force yeah and
what I'm noticing here is that on either
side of that Dynamic there is some form
of unowned aggression in a lot of the
cases we've just described so if you if
you think you're not if you think you're
receiving passive aggression how how do
you know like if someone's listening to
this they're like oh I'm surrounded by
passive aggression how do you know if
it's actually you're receiving it or
you're the source of it and you're
projecting it and creating it uh if
you're triggered by it then you're
you're at least part of the source of it
yeah so
um definitely definitely like if you're
triggered by passive aggression that
means that there's some part of your own
passive aggression and particularly
maybe just towards yourself maybe it's
just the voice in your head that you're
not owning and and not loving and not
saying oh right I really want this I
really like desire this I want it the
world to be this way and that's okay
like giving yourself
that that that recognition that you're
at choice and so that's not happening
and and you're not loving that aspect of
yourself typically if you are if you're
surrounded by path of aggression you're
like oh check that out and you're not
triggered by it then you're not the
source and don't mean that in a dis
disassociated way either there's some
people there's some people are like I am
not bothered At All by all of this
passive aggression that's not what I'm
talking about right then you're probably
very much being passive aggression being
passive aggressive yeah yeah so you
mentioned something really interesting
there about internal like it might just
be with yourself how how would you
recognize if you are being passive
aggressive with
yourself oh man there's so many ways
that we're passive aggressive with
oursel one of my favorites this is going
to bother a lot of people but one of my
favorites is the like the like super
helpful coach selft
talk it's like you can do it
everything's great like yeah like and
you're like you know one part of you is
like oh man this day is crap turn that
FR upside down says that like it's like
you're basically saying you're not
allowed to feel this way I need you to
feel this way like that's a form of
aggression and and so but you're not
you're doing it in the form of like hey
I'm this really good friend he's a happy
Coach and and you know we've all seen
the dozens of movies about somebody
who's like really trying to live like
that for 20 years and then goes into
this deep dark hole and and those movies
are made because there's a reality to
that so the passive aggressive usually
ends up just like in a relationship into
some [__] explosion you know I don't
know why we seemed happy and then he
just left after 20 years or she just
left like there was a lot of passive
aggression going on in those
relationships so similarly in the head
that's one form another way that um we
can be passive aggressive is that if you
look at the way the voice in the head
typically works there's and it's
different for everybody in this but
there's often a bully which is like you
got to lose weight you gotta you got to
work harder you gotta make more friends
you're 40 years old and you don't own a
house yet whatever the thing the bully
is saying and then there's the other
side of it which is like
yeah yeah I'm going to get right to that
like or oh yeah no that's never going to
work I'm never going to change this is
never going to happen I'm like the part
of the internal dialogue that goes oh I
just saw that thing how do I make it
stay that's like passive aggression
that's that's like it's an undermining
it's a saying that like you can't it's
not going to work it's like that little
yeah this is never going to work that
part of your voice in your head also can
be incredibly passive aggress
aggressive you know yeah yeah I'm also
like wondering how
many I'm just curious like how many how
many people listening to this right now
are like oh yeah all the passive
aggression that I see out there that's
triggering me this is like really good
fodder for my own growth and then once
I've done all that growth and I'm no
longer triggered by it everything will
change and I will have fixed all of the
passive aggression around me in the
world and I'm wondering like what what
do you see in there
yeah you're not wrong that's there's
truth to that and it's a very slow and
efficient path do all that great
fantastic and draw boundaries and and
see what it's like to hold a boundary to
the aggression so the thing about it is
when we allow ourselves to be aggressive
to ourselves then we allow almost in
kind other people to be that aggressive
with us we expect
it right and and it's okay of course
we're living with it every day why would
we think it's not okay as we learn to
love
ourselves as we say no that kind of
selft talk that kind of internal
relationship is not okay I'm not living
with that then we're not going to accept
it from the outside world vice versa if
we say hey I'm not going to accept that
pass I'm not accepting guilt trips from
you mom anymore it's not happening I
love you I want to interact with you I
care about you but when you do guilt
trips I am going to leave or I am going
to say mom please don't do a guilt trip
on me and I'll just keep on repeating it
until you stop whatever I'm going to
do when I say that I'm sending a very
strong signal to the voice of my head
that I'm not doing that to my this is
unacceptable so both ways work and and
so to do them both at the same time is a
far more efficient path and to do it
like I'm going to fix it all on myself
and then go on to the outside world and
be you know happy and everybody's going
to not be passive aggressive with me
because the truth is if you're
interacting with people they're going to
be passive aggressive with you and
you're going to like you know be
triggered by it or not be triggered by
it interact with it or not interact with
it those are all the choices that you
have so let's say somebody who's done a
lot of this work and they're recognizing
the way that they've been triggered by
passive aggression and then they work
through that trigger and naturally
they're going to start to see it
wherever it is yeah and they might find
themselves swimming in a culture where
passive aggression is a norm yeah this
could be any culture in different ways
not to call out particular culture so
what you know what happens when when a
person finds themselves just swimming in
it
yeah yeah I mean first I just noticed
that like generally if PE if the if
there's
more so there's acting being kind
because you have an open heart and you
want to be kind and then there's like
being polite and being nice and I notice
the more nice and polite a culture is
often times the more passive aggressive
passive aggression is builtin there's
like a kind of a builtin like that very
nice everybody's very nice to us in this
neighborhood and like that's the
neighborhood where there's going to be a
[__] ton of gossip that's that's the
lot of people talking about each other
behind their back and
so and whereas cultures
where that isn't like there's no
expectation of Civility niceness like in
that way if it's not heartfelt and it's
like yeah it's totally okay to say God
damn it that I'm upset with you then
there's going to be like less passive
aggression then the the place where
passive aggression in those societies
are going to if someone's like a bully
Yeller there's going to be the P the
person on the other side of the fear
triangle like the victim who's going to
fall into that passive aggression
so so that's typically where you'll see
it in a society what do you do in that
Society is is interesting right so the
other day Tara and I were sitting at
this coffee shop and we were just like
we had had a long day and we were just
kind of spacing
out and there was a a couple sitting
near us and they walked out and I heard
them say oh my God that was so rude how
like what makes them think they could do
that or something like that and I was
like oh wow they're speaking about us
because we were just staring out into
the air but we were staring in their
Direction and so they felt wash and I
totally appreciate how like that like I
like I could see someone going yeah
that's that's rude but that's like
that's one of those like oh this is a
societal Norm that we have a contract in
our little part of society that that's
not okay there's other parts of society
where people are like yeah staring at
somebody's not a problem that's kind of
what you do if you're just hanging out
together um and so so it's just like the
more of those kind of like Norms the
more of that like setup where this is
what I can do and this is what I can't
do and it gets more and more complicated
off often you're going to get
more you're going to get more passive
aggression if
you don't want to do that then you have
to feel like you're not actually
obligated to those
Norms which is really really scary and
it's it reminds me of this story I think
it's a Buddhist story but it's like you
know similar to Jesus um going out into
the desert and getting like the three
Temptations I believe
that mea Mara I can't remember had three
Temptations for Buddha and um and one of
The Temptations was like societal Norms
like the Temptation is like what will
Society think of you like your
reputation in society like and so
there's a an you can't believe those
things if you're going to like you can
believe like oh if I hurt somebody
that's not okay that's moral but if it's
just like these arbitrary rules that
have been set up so that people can stay
comfortable if you feel those then
you're going to you're bound to be more
and more passive aggressive and be
caught up in it if you can not if you
can see through those things you can say
oh like that's a choice that I can make
but it's a choice I get to make and I'm
not a bad person because I'm not doing
what this particular part of society
wants me to do then there's less of a
chance of you falling into the passive
aggressive
behavior um at the same time you're
probably if you're in a passive
aggressive Society you're going to
receive a certain amount of that and if
that's trigger you until it doesn't
until you can see through that until
you're not that way with yourself or
you're going to say I don't want to live
in that kind of a society which I think
a ton of people do I think our cities
are full of young people who are like I
don't want to live in that [__]
passive aggressive Society in the
midwest or in the South or in [__]
Modesta whatever I don't want to live in
that and so they come to a place where
they area yeah where they hope that they
can find more freedom and make their own
social norms I want to go back and
double a little bit on kind of how we
opened the episode with taking passive
aggression and making it active and I'm
I'm curious like what do you mean when
you invite people into turning their
passive aggression into active
aggression and like what are some of the
guard rails around that within whether
it's in the course or in coaching or
yeah maybe in somebody in a relationship
when they're realizing someone's being
passive aggressive with with them and
it's a partner and they're just like hey
you know what I I welcome your
aggression what are what are some ways
to have that not go totally sideways or
at least welcome the dumpster fire yeah
yeah in a healthy way so what what I
would say is that you know our rule is
rule of thumb is that we don't get angry
at somebody so that doesn't matter if
it's aggressive anger or passive
aggressive anger like we don't get angry
at somebody without permission and so
you want to be permiss give get
permission so we'll in if we're
facilitating somebody and we're getting
paid to help somebody work with this
stuff we'll be like hey that's passive
let's make it aggressive and like invite
them into experiencing that you don't
need to do it at anybody you can just do
it you can just get into a room and and
move the anger that's underneath the
passive aggression and that's going to
be your most effective way to reduce the
amount of passive aggression also that
you're that you're that you're doing the
other thing is to really admit that it's
passive aggression is really really
useful here's all the things that I do
when I want to get my way and and I'm
and I'm not directly asking for it write
them all down and those are all passive
aggression C all forms of passive
aggression that you can look
at so admitting it to yourself is a
really important thing um moving the
anger outwardly but not at anybody is
great if somebody wants to give you
permission
fantastic if they do I I it's very
tentative it's very risky especially if
it's in a long-term relationship there
can be a lot of retraumatization and
damage so I really recommend if you're
going to do that at least the first
couple times do it with a
professional and also if you're going to
um do that at any time the person wants
to stop you stop um so it's you know so
that somebody can actually feel like
they're in control that they're not just
being yelled at and re-traumatizing
themselves so that's that's another
thing I think
um also just recognizing that you have
choice and you can ask for what you want
a lot of passive aggression stops when
somebody feels like oh I can just ask
for what I want and typically it's going
to be like I can't ask for what I want
because he's not going to say yes
anyways or I can't ask for what I want
because then the marriage might fail
there's going to always be
some reason that you're stuck on the
other side of it and it's going to seem
really really
real
um but that's a choice you're making and
you have to recognize like oh I'm
choosing not to ask for what I want want
because this is the trade that I'm
making for that and until it feels
empowered until you can't blame anybody
and you don't feel stuck that it's a
choice then it's going to continue to be
passive aggression so those are those
are some of the things that you can do
to really start loosening up your own
passive aggression passive aggressive a
actions also drawing boundaries is
fantastic if you're being passive
aggressive often times like my mom I
when we had this conversation about you
know how she was making it so people
wanted to yell at her you know earlier
we had talked about my dad is like if
you want my dad to stop yelling at you
it's really easy you just say hey when
you yell me I'm going to leave my dad
couldn't have lived without my mom he
would like so all all she had to do was
just like walk out of the house for
three hours every time he yelled at her
and it would have been done in a couple
three weeks and so it's like drawing
that boundary is a really asking for
what you want drawing the boundary those
are the skills to stop the passive
aggression yeah I'm also curious for for
whoever's listening to this and they're
like oh that like make the passive
aggression active that's a great idea
and then they want to go to their spouse
and be like hey you're being passive
aggressive make it active or they go to
their team they're like okay enough of
this passive
aggression like bring it and like that's
that's part of part of my question there
is like what do the guidance or the
don't do that the the warning or the my
guidance is don't [__] do that like
you're trying to change somebody else
you're you're doing the same thing
they're doing just in a different way
it's it's the same it's the same habit
it's the same pattern just be recreating
itself it's not your job if you want to
be in a loving relationship love the
person and and yourself the way that you
are and don't be trying to change them
and so that whole you should be you
should do this you that's you trying to
manipulate them now you can invite them
to it say Hey you know I noticed this
kind of thing is happening how would you
feel let's listen to this podcast
together but it's if you're in there
trying to change them to be different so
that you can be happy then you're as
much in the fear triangle as they are
which by the way is the other thing that
you can do around passive aggression is
really look at the fear and sit in the
fear that's underneath the aggression
that if it's not always there but often
there's some fear and so that's that's
one end of the spectrum is the like
you're being passive aggressive make
active end of the spectrum might just be
like hey I noticed like what's what it
appears to me is passive aggression and
actually I'm I'm here for it I welcome I
welcome your anger like I'm I'm curious
any any tips or guidance if if that's
the way you're feeling in in a
situation yeah I think if you're feeling
that way that that's great as long as
you can not feel obligated to do that
and be able to say stop when you need it
to stop but yeah if you're like oh I
know it's your passive aggressive and I
know I notic that there's some passive
aggression going on or I'm feeling it
even better I'm feeling that I'm feeling
what's happening right now as passive
aggression and I just want you to know
I'm totally happy to hear what you want
I'm happy to hear your anger I'm happy
to hear the boundary that you might have
sounds
fantastic awesome yeah and
uh I'd love to leave listeners with an
experiment till they hear in next
episode what what's what's an experiment
somebody could bringing into their life
to either
notice or bring just bring this more
into awareness in the world yeah write
down a list of all the people that you
subtly blame and for
what so just like go okay here's a list
of all the people I subtly blame and for
what and then when you've made that
list find out how you're being
aggressive to them like right here's the
ways that I'm being aggressive and so it
can either be passive or direct or both
or it could be many but just like notice
that wherever there's that blame there's
some form of aggression that's happening
and write it down and that'll really
help you see it more clearly when it's
happening it also help you get in touch
with like oh I'm blaming
somebody like they're hurting
me and and and they need to stop like
that you'll get to and you'll start
feeling that right away which is really
the root of that is to really be able to
be in contact when you're blaming
somebody
else
awesome cool thank you Joe I'm oh wait I
have one more I have another one um we
have the upright apology episode and I I
think we have something on the website
on apologies and uh under the
experiments part of of uh the website
but the other thing you can do is and
very powerful is to do an upright not a
regular but an upright apology for all
the places that you've been passive
aggression aggressive so I know that if
you probably make 20 apologies for
Passive aggression you're the amount of
passive aggression that you're going to
be doing in the world will probably
decrease by at least 30 or
40% as long as it's not a passive
aggressive apology upright apology
that's right it's
like I'm sorry that you made me get
angry at you the other day I'm sorry
that you made me guilt trip you there
was just no other way to do it put up
with your [__]
[Laughter]
oh my gosh it just goes to prove like
you can take any any recognition and and
weaponize it yeah
indeed H all right awesome yeah thank
you Joe a pleasure thank you thank you
thanks everybody for
listening and send us your thoughts